---
layout: post
title:  "OSTEP: Review and progress"
date:   2021-11-02 15:20:45 +0100
categories: computer-science operating-systems
---

20/Nov/2021
First day of OSTEP, reading through Intro and the first few chapters on processes.

The CPU cycle - fetch instructions, decode them, execute them.

Virtualization is the first abstraction explored:
* Processes have this illusion that they have their own private memory, called virtual memory.
* CPUs are virtualized too, processes are under the impression that CPU belongs only to them.

We will learn about file systems and concurrency (yay).

Lecture 1-1 is kinda useful as an overview of what will learn about.
1-2 is mostly about the course itself for the Uni of Wisconsin students, it's safe to skip in my opinion.

Hardware support for levels of trust
- Modes of operation (per CPU)
    * User Mode (restricted, application, non-privileged)
    * Kernel Mode (OS, unrestricted, privileged)

There is a bit set to 1 or 0 which sets the mode.

- Transition between the modes
    * Hardware instructions
        * Enter Kernel mode from user mode: trap or interrupt (in x86)
        * Return to user from kernel: return from trap
        * set up trap handlers (execute something in OS by invoking a trap handler)
          The trap handlers are set up during the time OS is booting

Modern OS has about 200 syscalls, xv6 has about 20.

System calls have their handlers in the OS, when we call them we have to call trap to, to change to kernel mode.

1. Mechanisms - The How
2. Policies - Scheduling (choose which process to run)

## First project

Trying to implement a key value store in plain C, maybe going for a bit of an overkill but I really want to do a proper one.
Using [this](https://www.andreinc.net/2021/10/02/implementing-hash-tables-in-c-part-1) guide to do it. The I just need to add the command line utility.

* Division and Multiplication hashing are used for hashing tables. Multiplication is far more popular because multiplying numbers is less "expensive" than dividing them.
* Both work for positive integers.

Man, have I got myself into a rabbit hole. Hasing is (unsuprisingly) a big area of computer science and mathematics which has produced many PhDs.

The general multiplicative hashing formula:
H_{multip}(x) = \frac{M}{W} * (Ax \mod W)

Going through Modern C at the moment to understand the language better, as I had difficulties using malloc and passing function pointers.

### Chapter 4
Process informally is a running program.
OS acheives an illusion of many programs running simultaneously by virtualizing the CPU and timesharing the resources.
There are multiple states that a process can be in, it's something I've learnt in college and that comes back to me with better context knowledge of OSes and kernel.

Process list is a data structure which stores all the processes. I vaguely remember that on Unix based systems there is a /proc directory which contains all those processes, if I am not mistaken.

Homework:
1. CPU utilization will be 100%, one process is going to run and then another one.
2. That depends on how many cycles IO will take to finish. Because I/O is the second process in the queue then the whole thing should take 4 + I/O delay when process 1 is blocked. 

    It waits for about 5 "cycles" for I/O to finish, like I thought.

3. Ordering matters, as I/O runs in the background we won't have to wait towards the end.
4. The CPU is idling while the first process waits for I/O to finish.
5. In this case the second process can continue it's work while the first process is waiting for I/O.
6. Now I can see the CPU stats. It takes about 31 cycles to run all four processes and the first process is taking a bulk of time by being I/O stuck each time it gets some execution time.
7. When we rerun the I/O stuck process immediately we get 100% cpu utilization, far better. It seems that becasue I/O is such a bottleneck and because and I/O bound process is likely to use I/O again it would be a good idea rerun immediately.

Could the compiler recognize those important I/O intersections and predict whether it should switch or be ready to?
8. 

### Chapter 5
fork(), exec() and wait() are important process API calls defined in Unix systems which allow for piping of data and spawning multiple child processes.

Homework:
1.  a - b

    a  - b
      |- c

    a - b

    a  - b
      |- d

    a  - b
      |- d
      |- e
2. The value of ~50% seems to almost be treshold between trees which grow taller and ones that stay close to the root. It's kinda obvious, but at the same time interesting.
3. Done it for seed 124, easy enough.
4. It's not what I expected, orphaned processes are owned by the root parent after their parent exits. I thought they would be terminated with it.
According to wikipedia the orphaned processes could be reowned by init, "subreaper" or terminated, depending on the system. The tidbit about daemons being orphaned processes that run indefinitely was quite interesting.
5. Done it, easy.

Code part (solutions are in a repo):
1. As expected, child sees the value set by parent but if it modifies it doesn't change anything for the parent. The moment fork is called there are two different stacks.
2. This one is way more difficult than I thought. I can see in GDB that file descriptor is correctly copied over to childs stack, but I cannot read anything from it, if it has been declared and initialized in the parent. In this situation only parent is able to read it. If I open the file descriptor within the child processes code then it works correctly.
3. 
## Lecture Intro to xv6 system calls
Fortunately I know good bit of this stuff from college, it's good to get a refresher though.
I didn't remember anything about general purpose registers, didn't know that in x86 eax can have a return code in it. Might have learnt it the security module, but definitely forgot about it.