---
layout: post
title:  "Object-Oriented Data Structures: C++ Course"
date:   2021-10-21 19:46:45 +0100
categories: coursera c++ learning 
---
### Week 1
This blog post consists of my notes about the C++ course.


C++ is a strongly typed programming language.

{% highlight c++ %}
int myint = 3;

{% endhighlight %}

There are two types of variables:
* Primitive
* User Defined

The primitives are:
* `int`
* `float`
* `double`
* `char`
* `void`
* `bool`

#### 1.2
Notion of encapsulation is introduced, class is presented as an entity which encloses data and functionality within itself.
Seems like C++ is object-oriented language.

Encapsulation extends to public and private elements within the class. `private` and `public` classifiers are used for that in C++.
Private functions and data can be accessed only by the class itself, public can be accessed by "client" code.

`.h` header files provide the *inteface* to the class, separate from the implementation in `.cpp`.

Header file includes declaration of all *member variables* and *member functions*. It's akin to API.

{% highlight c++%}
// Always present in .h files
// Instructs the compiler to only compile this file once
#pragma once

class Cube {
    public:
        double getVolume();
        double getSurfaceArea();
        void setLength(double length);

    private:
        double length_;
}
{% endhighlight %}

{% highlight c++%}
void Cube::setLength(double length) {
    length_ = length;
}
{% endhighlight %}

### 1.3

`std`  a is C++ standard library, organized into many separate sub-libraries.

`iostream` allows to output data to files or console.

`using` is a keyword which allows us to call methods without indicating the class (I guess). 
It shouldn't be used too much as it reduces code readability.

### 2.1
Lifecycle of a function is associated with it's stack (simple). Stack grows from high to low addresses (is that a general rule?).
> The concept of the stack growing downward is often true on many computer architectures (but not universally).

Kinda expected.

NEVER return a reference to a local variable, otherwise, guess what, you have a dangling pointer.

"Heap memory is independent of the lifecycle of a function" - never thought about that way, it's nicely phrased.
Creating new heap memory in C++ is done with `new` operator. It returns a pointer to the memory storing the data, not an isntance of the data itself. The only time memory is ever reclaimed is when pointer is passed to `delete` operator.
`nullptr` - pointer holding address 0x0, effectively a null address. Leads to a segfault when someone tries to access it.
Invoking `delete` on a pointer holding address of a heap object only releases this object. The pointer still holds the value of the memory address it referenced.

{% highlight c++%}
int i = 2, j = 4, k = 8;
int *p = &i, *q = &j, *r = &k;

k = i;
cout << i << j << k << *p << *q << *r << endl; // 2 4 2 2 4 2

p = q;
cout << i << j << k << *p << *q << *r << endl; // 2 4 2 4 4 2

*q = *r;
cout << i << j << k << *p << *q << *r << endl; // 2 2 2 2 2 2

{% endhighlight %}

### 3.1

Automatic default constructor is provided for C++ classes by the compiler. It will initialize all member variables to their default values.
If any constructor is defined, the automatic constructor will not be defined.

*Custom copy constructors* - completely new concept to me. A special constructor which allows one to make a copy of an existing object.
Automatic copy constructor is provided by the compiler, it copies all parameters in case of a copy.

Custom copy constructor definition:
{% highlight c++%}
void Cube::Cube(const Cube & obj) // parameter must be a const reference of the class type
{% endhighlight %}

It is invoked automatically when:
* We are passing an object as a parameter (by value)
* Returning an object from a function (by value)
* Initialzing a new object from a previous copy of an object

I have never really thought about the way in which return values are copied to the calling function from the stack perspective.
I vaguely remember something from the security classes about special values being pushed on the stack.
But in this course it's interesting to see how copy constructor is invoked both when returning an object and when assigning it to a variable.

{% highlight c++%}
Cube c;
Cube myCube;

myCube = c; // no constructor work happens here, it's an assignment without any copying.
{% endhighlight %}

Assignment operator replaces the value of an existing object, without creating a new one.
There is an automatic assignment operator which will copy the contents of all member variables to a target object.

Custom assignment operator:
{% highlight c++%}
Cube & Cube::operator=(const Cube & obj) {
    //code
    return *this; // you have to return instance itself
}
{% endhighlight %}

Instance of a variable can be stored in three ways:
* Directly in memory
* Accessed by a pointer
* Accessed by reference

By default all variables are drectly stored in memory.
Pointers take a memory address width (64-bit on a 64-bit system)

Reference is an alias to existing memory and is denoted with an &.
It does not store memory itself, it is only an alias to another variable. It must be assigned the variable is initialized.

Creation of new objects via constructors, copies and assignments operators is a concern from the perspective of memory.
We want to use as little memory as possible to remain performant.

Specifying in the function signature that it takes a reference will get a reference with the same argument as with invocation for the value.

It's interesting how all of those memory abstractions are not presented in languages like Python or Java, it seems like a new world to me.

There is an *automatic default destructor*. It calls the default destructor of all objects.
The destructors are automatically called when an object is being reclaimed by the system.
When in stack memory destructor is called as soon as a function returns, when in heap when `delete` is used.

{% highlight c++%}
Cube::~Cube() // Custom destructor, no args no return type
{% endhighlight %}

Unsigned and signed integers comparisons can be dangerous, especially when we perform arithmetic operations on them in C++.
In the example below if `v.size()` returns 0 subtracting 1 from it might give us the maximum unsigned value, since size variables are often unsigned.

{% highlight c++%}
std::vector<int> v = {1,2,3,4};
for (int i=0; i <= v.size()-1; i++) {
    std::cout << v[i] << std::endl;
}
{% endhighlight %}

## Week 4
*Template type* - special type in C++ that can take on different types when the type is initialized.

`std::vector` is such a type, it can be of type `<char>`, `<int>` or any other. Allocator braces are the brackets that hold the type.